Lesson2:
THE FALL OF MAN
MEMORY VERSE: "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men for that all have sinned”(Romans 5:12).
TEXT: Genesis 3:1-24; 4:1-26; 5:1-32
they enjoyed His presence, fellowship and perfect relationship. However, their intimacy and fellowship with God was shortlived when they disobeyed His command by yielding to temptation and deception masterminded by Satan. The disobedience of Adam, the first man, had grave consequences on humanity enerally. God, however, intervened and held out a life iine for man.
Before this account of man's fall, Satan had fallen from his exalted position as God's anointed cherub in heaven. He became God's archenemy and set out to oppose and attack every project of God. Satan introduced sin into the human race; thereafter, the contagious nature of sin and its ripple effect continued to manifest from generation to generation. Any act of disobedience to God's clear commandments attracts grievous punishment. Adam and Eve were consequently expelled from the Garden of Eden underscoring the fact that we can lose any privilege through sinful acts and lifestyles.The only way to keep whatever blessing God has bestowed on us is to continue in total trust and obedience to His word.
THE ENTRANCE OF SIN AND CURSE INTO THE WORLD (Genesis 3:1-24; Romans 5:12,14-19; Isaiah 14:12-15; Ezekiel 28:14-19; 1 Timothy 2:14; Revelation 12:7-9,12)
Our text opens with the serpent who engaged Eve in a mischievous conversation in the Garden of Eden. His approach was subtle and designed to make her sin against God. It is important to state here that being tempted is not a sin, but yielding to it. Anyone,regardless of age, colour, race, social or spiritual status can be tempted. Even our Lord Jesus Christ was tempted.
The Scripture identifies this serpent as Satan or the Devil (Revelation 12:9; 20:2), Satan was previously known as Lucifer, a covering Cherub, who was in the presence of God in heaven but was cast out as a result of pride and rebellion. The fact of Lucifer's rebellion and downfall is stated in God's word without the actual timeline or when it occurred (Isaiah 14:12-15; Ezekiel 28:14-19).
Satan "said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said,Ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden?"(Genesis 3:1). The question was meant to shake Eve's confidence in God's word. Then, he went further to accuse Him of deceiving them so that their eyes would not be opened.He eventually moved from the use of subtle doubt to outright denial of God's word, portraying Him as a liar.Satan said: "Ye shall not surely die”(Genesis 3:4).He deceived Eve to think that eating the forbidden fruit would make her better, wiser and independent. He entrapped her by concentrating on three major areas of temptation: sight, flesh and self."And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food..."; this is otherwise termed, lust of the flesh. "...And that it was pleasant to the eyes"-lust of the eyes; "..and a tree to be desired to make one wise"- pride of life. The enemy uses what people see, hear, desire or crave to tempt them (James 1:14,15). Christians should be wary of what they gaze upon, crave or desire lest the enemy makes it an object of strong temptations for them. Eventually,Eve succumbed to the temptation, ate the forbidden fruit and persuaded the husband also, and he did eat,That was the fatal, final fall of man which plunged humanity into eternal condemnation (Romans 5:12-i9).By disobeying God's command, Adam and Eve voluntarily relinquished their authority and sold mankind to Satan.
Satan still uses the weapons of doubt, deception and denial of God's word in his attempt to make believers sin against God in their unguarded moments. He makes sin appear very attractive, harmless and beneficial to his targets.
There are steps to take to overcome deception by Satan and escape his wiles. First, avoid getting into a conversation or debate with him concerning God's commandments. Eve's response gave Satan a foothold into her life and weakened her confidence in the Lord.The word of God admonishes us to rather resist him and he will flee (1 Peter 5:8,9; James 4:7). Second,refrain from listening to talks or words that contradict the Bible because they weaken godly convictions. Third,never loiter, either physically or in your imagination,around the things God prohibits. Fourth, do not doubt the integrity and love of God, even when you do not fully understand His dealings. Believe that He is working for your good all the time. Fifth, do not add to or subtraci from the word of God (Proverbs 30:5,6; Revelation 22:18,19).
The consequences of Adam and Eve's disobedience were immediate and far reaching.Though their eyes were opened and they had knowledge of good and evil,they lost everything - the divine nature, favour and privilege. In their place, they forfeited access to the tree of life, lost their fellowship with God, divine presence,comfort of the Garden of Eden and incurred eternal condemnation, among others. Above all, their act of disobedience brought eternal curse on the whole human race. Man became morally deformed, took on the nature of Satan and was estranged from God. He also forfeited his freedom and dominion and became a captive of Satan. Man lost his innocence and became a slave of an evil conscience while guilt, fear and shame took over Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world,and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men,for that all have sinned” (Romans 5:12). The sin of Adam, the fountain head of the human race, made all his offspring sinners by nature. Adam and Eve suddenly realised they were naked and attempted to cover themselves with fig leaves, a symbol of self righteousness. When God finally confronted them with their sin, they offered nothing but buck-passing and blame-game. This is what happens when a believer backsliaes; he blames others but hardly admits his own faults.
However, God responded to the fall of man in a most gracious manner. First, He came seeking him. He asked dam, "where art thou?" God still seeks out sinners and backsliders so as to bring them to repentance and restoration. Second, God clothed Adam and his wife.He made coats of animal skin to cover their nakedness.This typified substitutionary atonement since the blood of an innocent animal must have been shed before the skin could be used. Animal skin covers nakedness more permanently than fig leaves. This is an example of the enduring righteousness that Christ gives. A sinner or backslider can receive this righteousness through repentance from sin and faith in the cleansing blood of our Lord Jesus, the Lamb that was slain for the sins of the whole world (John 1:29).
Third, God promised redemption for man. In what is often called the "proto-evanget, God declared that the seed of the woman would bruise the serpent's head."And I will put enmity between thee and the woman,and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel" (Genesis 3:15). The seed of the woman is none else but Jesus Christ. Fourth, God drove man out of the Garden of Eden lest he should eat of the tree of life in his fallen condition and become irredeemable.
The fall of man gave room for the revelation of God's redemptive attribuies of grace and holiness. God's grace dealt mercifully with sinful man, but His holiness udged his sin with severity. Curses were placed upon the serpent, Eve, Adam and the earth. The trio - Satan,sin and curses - are always together. Anywhere Satan is allowed, sin would thrive and ultimately, there will be manifestation of all manner of curses and calamities.Despite the excuses of Adam and Eve, judgment came upon them. No excuse will be acceptable enough to liberate any unrepentant sinner from God's judgment.AN EMBLEM OF ACCEPTABLE SACRIFICE AND REJECTION OF CAIN'S OFFERING (Genesis 4:1-26;Hebrews 11:4; Deuteronomy 15:19; Leviticus 9:3;Matthew 26:28; 1 John 3:12)
After their expulsion from the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve gave birth to Cain followed by Abel. Being offspring of the fall, they were sinners. In process of time, they brought offerings to God. Cain took of his farm produce, but Abel brought a choice firstling out of his flock. In response, God accepted the offering of Abel but rejected Cain and his offering. The New Testament explains that Abel offered his sacrifice by faith and followed God's acceptable pattern. Therefore, he was counted righteous by God (Hebrews 11:4; Matthew 23:35).In contrast, Cain's offering was rejected because he approached God on his own merit and not by faith.Also, his sacrifice consisted of his own works (farm produce) instead of life wherein there is blood (Hebrews 9:22; Leviticus 17:14). The Bible says his works were evil (1 John 3:12). Cain's response to God showed that he was not disposed to right living.There are people like Cain, who would rather offer sacrifice to God than obey Him. Making fat contributions to sponsor religious programmes or church projects, without obeying God's callto repentance and faith in Jesus Christ, will not guarantee acceptability before Him."But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect" (Genesis 4:5), Notice it was not only the offering but Cain, the offerer, himself was rejected by God,His heart was not right with God and he manifested his evil nature when he was corrected. The negative reaction of Cain to his rejection and divine correction should be avoided.
"And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, shait thou not be accepted?..."(Genesis 4:6,7a). Cain did not do well and he refused to respond to the divine call to repent. He could have learnt from Abel, but instead got angry and became envious. Those who desire to grow spiritually should cultivate the habit of learning from other believers who are doing well. Cain expressed his anger and hatred against God
by killing his innocent brother. Thus, he became the first murderer, and Abel the first martyr, recorded in the Bible. He portrayed the nature of Satan which he had inherited from Adam.
"...Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?" (Genesis 4:9). Cain lied and answered God defiantly. He refused to take responsibility for his action and thereby shut the door of mercy against himself. Consequently, God placed a curse on him and declared that he would be a fugitive and vagabond on the earth. Curses are perpetuated by sinful lifestyles but they are broken through faith in God. Some people act like Cain. They are defiant in sin;they reject God's gracious entreaties and offer of mercy.Being often reproved, they harden their necks and would be destroyed without remedy (Proverbs 29:1). But believers are expected to be teachable, tender in heart,and be their brother's keeper.
"And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD,and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city...”(Genesis 4:16,17). The descendants of Cain continued a system of civilisation.They built cities, manufactured iron and bronze products, developed and played musical instruments,but not without signs of degeneracy. They demonstrated great skills and creativity but lacked moral uprightness,For example, Lamech took two wives and boasted about killing a man. Ever since, the same trend of moral retrogression has characterised the human race despite great advances in science and technology. This is an indication that civilisation and advancement can never replace the necessity of regeneration through Christ Every unconverted person will definitely betray the depravity of the human heart without salvation.
EXPOSITIONS ON THE GENEALOGY OF ADAM(Genesis 5:1-32; Luke 3:23-38; Romans 5:12 Ecclesiastes 3:1,2; Hebrews 9:27)
"This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him"(Genesis 5:1). The Scripture provides a clear but concise detail of the ancestry or genealogy of the human race. The ultimate purpose of Bible genealogies is to trace the descent from Adam to Jesus Christ, the seed of the woman. Notice that the tracing of genealogies ended with that of Jesus in the New Testament. It is also plain that Bible genealogies are selective to exclude names or family lines that are not relevant to the set objective.
A striking observation in this genealogy is that human lifespan became shorter from one generation to another as sin began to take its toll on humanity. It is significant also that Cain was not mentioned in the genealogy of Adam, Sin displaces and causes a person's name to be erased from the Book of life. To have one's name written and remain in the Book of life, one has to walk consistently with God to the very end.
It is very instructive to note that in this genealogy,the phrase, "And he died", ended the life of everyone,except Enoch who walked with God and did not taste death. The lesson here is that we overcome death by walking with God through faith in Jesus Christ.Whosoever believes in Jesus will pass from death to life and will have victory over death (John 11:25,26; 1 John 3:14).
Of particular note was Enoch's translation."By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death;and was not found, because God had translated him:for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God"(Hebrews 11:5). This serves as a preview of the rapture of true believers. At the rapture, bodies of saints would be changed and become incorruptible and immortal. Death would be vanquished and it would be victory at last 1 Corinthians 15:51-57; 1 Thessalonians 4:13-18).
If we walk with God in righteousness and true holiness in this perverse and degenerate world, we shall be taken away to be with the Lord at the rapture and shall reign with Him forever and ever.